Reviewer(s)' Comments to Author:
Referee: 1

Comments to the Author
I appreciate the opportunity to review this submission to JLAS. This paper studies redistricting in Mexico. The authors evaluate the effect of different redistricting proposal on seat share. In particular, they investigate how much influence parties can have in the process and if this influence has the potential to alter seat shares. While I am enthusiastic that after a thorough revision the paper can be published at JLAS, I believe in its current form needs substantial changes in the framing and writing of the article. I recommend an R&R.
I have 4 main concerns with this paper 1) the paper aims to test many things some of which are not related to each other, 2) the presentation of hypotheses or premises is very convoluted 3) the paper makes several assumptions regarding the counterfactuals that are never clearly stated 4) the authors conclusions do not derive from “tests” but on interpretation of descriptive tables and graphs. I explain each in detail below:
1) The paper aims to test many things, some of which are not related to each other. I find the inclusion of question 1 in the paper very confusing. While the other questions are about redistricting, Q1 is about a different electoral systems. This is not “redistricting as an institution” is about a different system (more in the vein of Horcasitas and Weldon 2023). You can have redistricting in a pure PR system too! It feels that the paper wants to evaluate Morena's 2022 proposal, but doesn’t commit to it (footnote 22). An additional problem that emerges when comparing different electoral systems is the implicit assumption that there is no strategic behavior among voters or parties. In my opinion, this does not belong in a redistricting paper.
2) The presentation of hypotheses or premises is very convoluted. Reading the results is not very straightforward because there are many premises, and the results jump from 3.1 to 1.2, etc. It would be clearer if the premises were streamlined and condensed into fewer (like 3), and then in the results, all the implications of that hypothesis are tested. There are many premises that are more implications of a previous premise than a premise in itself.
3) In pag 10, the articles says “their actions should respond to either a vote share or seat maximizing strategy,” yet it is assumed through the premises that they are maximizing their seat share. It is theoretically unclear why parties would maximize seats given 1) the cap in over-representation and 2) the fact that their funding is based on previous vote shares.
4) The author's “evidence” to support or reject their premises does not derive from “tests” but from the interpretation of descriptive tables and graphs. For example, take Premises 2.1 and 2.2. The question is that partisan engagement should favor parties. It is unclear why we would expect the winner to advantage parties because it is a compromise. But, we should expect that for each party their proposals would have avantage them (closer to what is presented in Table 3). In the results section pag 23 it says
“These results reveal that the largest range, by far, is for PRI with the 2015 turnout––a 27-seat difference between the worst-case and the best electoral scenario for this party. The second-largest difference between the worst and the best plan is for both PAN and MORENA with the 2018 turnout – a range of 14 seats for each party. The rest are singledigit differences, where the lowest two are for MORENA and MC––with 2 and 1 seat, respectively–– with the 2015 turnout. Overall, these results show that there was no substantial difference between the parties’ best and worst possible plans considered by the TC (contradicting Premises 2.1 and 3.4).”
How do the authors reach the conclusion that there is no substantial difference and that 2.1 is contradicted? Is a 27 seat difference for the PRI not substantial? It depends on what is the null that we are trying to reject. If the authors presented a t-test and showed there is no significant difference in seat distribution for the PRI, that would be a test showing no substantial difference and no support for the 2.1 premise. This is a comment that applies to all the results in the paper.
Minor points: in page says 2107 instead of 2017; many of the graphs are impossible to read because of their size and shape (e g Fig 2).

Referee: 2

Comments to the Author
Review of “Institutions Matter, Lines Don’t: Unveiling Mexico’s Redistricting Process”

This paper presents an empirical analysis of three major questions regarding redistricting in Mexico: (1) How much might redistricting affect the distribution of seats across parties? (2) Have any parties systematically benefited from redistricting? And (3) what component of redistricting has greater potential to affect outcomes? The analysis uses a very impressive database with information on all the plans proposed by political parties in the redistricting rounds of 2013 and 2017.

I enjoyed reading the paper. This is a very important topic, particularly given the current political context in the country. These things said, I think the current version of the manuscript is underdeveloped and requires a considerable amount of work. Below, I have written some comments and suggestions. Hope the authors finds these helpful.

Main comments (in no particular order)

1. The paper ignores important literature on the topic. Previous works on Mexico have done empirical exercises similar to those presented in Section 5.1. Both Diaz-Cayeros (2005) and Aparicio and Marquez (2010) study how the allocation of seats (in the Senate and the Camara de Diputados, respectively) would change under a pure proportional representation system. The big difference is that those studies actually incorporate measures of uncertainty at the moment of building their counterfactual allocations — and this is something Diaz-Cayeros (2005) describes as being theoretically important as well (more on this below).

2. I realize this might just be me but, even as someone who is interested in Mexican politics (and in this type of topics), I found the paper extremely hard to read. In my view, there are two big issues. The first has to do with the organization of the paper. Section 3 introduces a large number of “premises,” and I found it hard to keep track of them. In fact, by the time I got to Section 5, in which these “premises” are tested, I had forgotten most of them. The second issue is the writing itself (particularly in Section 3). Again, I realize this might just be me, but the writing was dense and in many cases it was unclear how the theoretical claims and/or issues that wanted to be evaluated actually connected to the “premise.” These things said, I followed the analyses in Section 5 with relative ease, so it really is about the description/writing and not about the substance.

This is just a matter of taste, but I suggest reconsidering the structure of the paper. My sense is that the main contributions of this paper are mostly empirical. For example, the paper evaluates the strength of the institutions surrounding the redistricting process in Mexico at a time when electoral institutions have been under attack. I am not sure whether the “theory section” adds much to the paper, particularly when (in its current form) it makes it harder to read. This is just a suggestion (not a request): I would consider removing Section 3 and splitting Section 5 into a series of tests with a brief explanation of the purpose of each test at the start. To be honest, I think this would be much more consistent with how the paper is described in the abstract.

3. I found the description of Section 5.1 to be misleading. This part of the analysis is not really about redistricting, it is about electoral system change. Of course, switching from a mixed-member system to a PR system would involve redistricting, but that is a separate (secondary) issue. In fact, notice that in order to build the counterfactuals in Table 1, one does not need any information on redistricting plans — it only uses data on election results, since it assumes a “nationwide PR electoral system.” In any case, I think it is a bit deceiving to describe this section as assessing the impact of the “institution or redistricting” rather than as the impact of the “electoral system” (as there are other things that change too, such as the ballot type).

4. An important limitation with the empirics is that the counterfactual seat allocations do not incorporate any measures of uncertainty. This can be done in at least two different ways. The first is to follow Diaz-Cayeros (2005) and Aparicio and Marquez (2010), and use Monte Carlo simulations. Alternatively, the authors could use simulations via bootstrap — i.e., they could simulate a large number of elections (say N=1000) by sampling secciones with replacement from each electoral district (for each redistricting plan).

To be clear, this is not just a methodological question – this could have important theoretical implications. For example, according to Diaz-Cayeros (2005) parties might prefer institutions that minimize the risk (variance in number of seats received) rather than those that maximize the number of seats they receive in the short run. This is a completely different motivation that is not even mentioned, let alone studied in the manuscript.

5. A closely related point — I find the above extra problematic because several pieces of evidence presented in the manuscript are compatible with the risk minimization strategy. Let me illustrate this with an example:

Consider two parties A and B and two districts. Suppose the initial redistricting plan creates two highly competitive districts for A and B (say each party wins each district with probability 1/2). Now, say A proposes a plan in which one of the two districts becomes safer for them at the expense of the other (that is, one safe district for A and one safe district for B). Notice that under both plans each party anticipates getting one seat (in expectation), but the first plan is much riskier for both parties (with probability 1/4 they lose both districts). If the parties are risk averse (even slightly), they would voluntarily and unanimously choose A's plan over the first. Also, notice that even a third party C not directly affected in terms of expected seats would prefer the latter plan, as it minimizes the probability that one party will with both districts and have a majority (and make policy by itself).

Now, notice that in the example above three patterns emerge: (1) *expected* number of seats (for either party) does not change, (2) number of competitive districts decreases, and (3) margin of victory increases. These patterns are consistent with the results presented in Table 4. Moreover, notice that this alternative explanation also accounts for the unanimous adoption of the plan, which the authors explain by appealing to irrationality and/or side payments on page 31.

6. In Section 6, the “unusual elections” explanation is ruled out by highlighting the stability of the results summarized in Figure 2, which was built using actual election results and “simulating a uniform vote swing from PRI to Morena.” However, this does not tell us whether the actual election result was unusual (given the underlying distribution of election results). So, this is yet another reason why it is necessary to model and incorporate the uncertainty of electoral outcomes into the counterfactual scenarios.

7. Many of the figures are very hard to read. I usually wouldn’t comment on this, but this was an issue throughout. Figure 2 is almost unreadable; the font is very small, and a few colors are hard to tell apart. Same goes for Figure 5; the font is too small to be read and zooming in doesn’t help either because the quality of the image is quite poor (it looks like a screenshot saved with very low resolution). Finally, I found Figure 6 to be unclear; neither axis is labelled, and the description of the figure in the text doesn’t explain what the x-axis is or how the figure is supposed to be read (note: I got it in the end, but figures should be easier to read).

Minor comments

8. The writing is bit sloppy throughout. Several sentences are missing key words (e.g., see paragraph on limited party capacity, page 35), or don’t really make sense (e.g., description of PRI’s results in Table 1, page 17).

9. The description of Table 2 says there are “no substantial differences” in the number of seats between best and worst plan. But what is the benchmark? How large would these effects need to be to be considered substantial?

10. Throughout the manuscript, the authors try to infer (or rule out) the parties’ motivations from the observed outcomes (or at least this is how it came off to me). But this is never justified. For comparison, a common criticism in studies of (strategic) institutional change is that even when a reform does benefit the party that enacts it, it is hard to demonstrate that this is the motivation behind the reform. I would suggest either softening the language around this or making it clear that the outcomes are not fully informative of motivations.

11. This is very minor, and I apologize for being pedantic, but the word “premise” is being used incorrectly. A premise is the basis of an argument, not its conclusion.


References:

Díaz-Cayeros, Alberto. 2005. “Endogenous Institutional Change in the Mexican Senate.” Comparative Political Studies, 38(10), 1196-1218.

Márquez, Javier and F. Javier Aparicio. 2010. “Un modelo Monte Carlo para la Cámara de Diputados en México.” Política y Gobierno 17(2):351–79.
