To: Awards Panel, Penn State Democracy Medal
    (by electronic mail: democracyinst@psu.edu )

Dec. 4, 2014

Dear Panelists,

I am pleased to nominate for your consideration Dr. Micah Altman (MIT) and Dr. Michael P. McDonald (University of Florida) for their work in the _Public Mapping Project_.

The delimitation of electoral boundaries is among the most frequently manipulated and least transparent processes in democratic governance. The process of selecting electoral boundaries offers opportunities for manipulation to favor parties, politicians, elites, and racial groups, especially when this process is not subject to public view. In response, Drs. Altman and McDonald created and deployed open-source web-accessible redistricting software called DistrictBuilder (http://districtbuilder.org). This builds on advances in information technology and in the conception of political participation to enable the public better evaluate and participate in electoral democracies.

Governments and advocacy groups successfully used this tool in six states and five localities to enable thousands of users to generate hundreds of legal redistricting plans. In conjunction with redistricting competitions, the software garnered widespread national and local media exposure. Over a dozen journal articles, book chapters, and opinion pieces describe Districtbuilder and the general project—most of these are available to read here: http://informatics.mit.edu/publications/topic/gis, whereas the software and project are most fully described here: http://informatics.mit.edu/publications/technology-public-participation-redistricting.

The DistrictBuilder software is *novel*, in that it is the first fully open-source redistricting software. DistrictBuilder is designed for use by redistricting novices, yet has a full suite of evaluation tools that aids users to draw redistricting plans that comply with U.S. federal and state legal requirements down to the detail of exact population balance. It was recognized by Politico as one of the top-ten political innovations of 2011 and was a recipient of the Tides Pizzigatti prize for public interest software. 

The DistrictBuilder software offers *systemic change*. The most direct transformative success occurred in Minneapolis, where a newly installed citizens commission and local advocacy groups used crowdsourcing features to identify minority community boundaries and to incorporate city council districts drawn by Latino and Somali grassroots groups into the official plan adopted by the commission. Further, the widespread creation of public plans has influenced the political process in new ways—for the first time in American history, publicly created plans have been submitted as bills in the legislature, considered for adoption, and recognized as legitimate by courts in several states. 

The DistrictBuilder software has *potential for diffusion*, as it can be deployed for any political mapping effort for which minimal geospatical data exists. Users interface with the software through their web browsers, so they do not need to install specialized software. Users can share plans, enabling a crowd-sourced solution to the thorny issues of representation inherent in redistricting. The software is designed to support multiple levels of election mapping, from the local city up to the national level. Moreover, it is fully internationalized and supports multiple languages—working with colleagues in Mexico, the software was deployed with data provided by Mexico’s Federal Electoral Institute, with touch-of-a-button translation of the website into Spanish or English. 

The DistrictBuilder software improves *democratic quality* in a number of different ways. Firstly, the project enables a qualitatively different form of political participation: electoral maps are policy proposals, in technical form. By using DistrictBuilder, non technical people can not only react to the proposals of others, but can create and submit their own. Secondly, the crowdsourcing concept inherently crosses partisan boundaries. As an example, Ohio reformers used the software to hold a contest to see who could draw the best congressional and state legislative plans. Plans were scored on a formula that included components of equal population, minimum minority representation, political fairness, district competition, compactness, and respect for political boundaries. While the advocacy groups were generally regarded as left-leaning, a Republican state legislator from Illinois won the congressional contest (a physics professor at Northern Illinois University with a keen interest in redistricting reform). Thirdly, crowdsourcing electoral maps enables the discovery of potential communities of interest that are not defined simply by demographics, and, by illuminating the wide space of possible plans, it enables discovery of the revealed preference of legislative redistricters. 

The DistrictBuilder software is *recent*. Software development began in 2009, with generous support from the Sloan Foundation, Joyce Foundation, Amazon for Education, and the Judy Ford Wason Center for Public Policy at Christopher Newport University, as well as pro-bono assistance from software development partner Azavea. The software was first deployed in 2011. 

If DistrictBuilder won the 2015 Penn State Democracy Medal, Drs. Altman and McDonald would use the award to assist with exploring international deployment of the software. Either Altman or McDonald would give the lecture while both would write the the innovation essay. The nominees are established political and information scientists who have been working on research and development in the area of electoral participation for two decades. Dr. Micah Altman is currently Director of Research at the MIT Libraries, and a Non-Resident Senior Fellow at the Brookings Institution. He is known for his work on computational models of electoral redistricting and for his contributions to the research methodology of social sciences. Dr. Michael P. McDonald is Associate Professor of Political Science at the University of Florida and a Non-Resident Senior Fellow at the Brookings Institution. His research interests are in the areas of elections and methodology. He is internationally known for his research, media commentary, and policy work centering on voter turnout, redistricting, and elections. 

Please feel free to contact me or the nominees for more information, using the information below:

Micah Altman
77 Massachusetts Ave., E25-131
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
Tel: 585-466-4224 E-mail: escience@mit.edu

Michael P. McDonald
University of Florida
Department of Political Science
234 Anderson Hall
P.O. Box 117325
Gainesville, FL 32611
Tel: 352-273-2371 E-mail: michael.mcdonald@ufl.edu

Sincerely,

Eric Magar, Associate Professor, Department of Political Science, ITAM, Mexico City.
Tel. +52(55)5628-4079, Fax +52(55)5490-4672. emagar@itam.mx
